Chapter 2
Relevance of ECCE – Critical periods and factors affecting development
2.1 Rationale for ECCE – Critical Periods 
New brain research has clearly established that the human brain grows 
at a rapid pace after birth and reaches 85 per cent of its adult weight by 
the time the child is 2 years old; it then continues on an incline till around 
six years of life, beyond which it tends to plateau. Within this span of six 
years several ‘critical periods’ have been identified for development of 
some important cognitive, linguistic and social competencies, which if 
subjected to psycho-social deprivation, can adversely impact on 
development of children’s full potential. (Doherty, 1997). Research based 
insight thus confirms the significance of the first six years of life. 
Research also establishes that development of brain is not only 
influenced by health, nutrition and quality of care but also the quality of 
psycho-social environment that the child is exposed to in early years. 
Logically, insights from research in ECCE and Neuroscience have major 
implications for how we organize care, stimulation and education of 
young children at home and in institutions. 250 Empirical evidence is also 
available from around the world of the significant impact, both 
immediate and long term, of participation in ECCE on the life trajectory of young children (Figure 1) 
Source: No Wolves along the Way: towards a national ECD model in Kyrgystan, Hugh Mclean and Rahat 
Orozova, UNICEF 2009
Scientific also indicates that within the span of early childhood years, there are certain sensitive periods 
or critical periods for development of some cognitive, linguistic, social and psychomotor competencies 
(Figure 2). These have significant implications for planning of a framework for children’s learning and 
development.
cd
2.1 Rationale for ECCE –
Critical periods of 
development
2.2 Significance of ECCE
2.2 Development Involves 
changes
2.3 Factors affecting
Development 
Source: Adapted from Nash, Early Years Study, 1999, Shankoff 2000.
A good learning programme at the early childhood stage helps to ensure appropriate opportunities for 
holistic learning and development particularly in these critical periods. Early intervention is of particular 
significance for children with developmental delays, infants with disabilities and children growing up in 
impoverished environments; by counteracting biological and environmental disadvantages, since plasticity in 
the brain allows circuits in the brain to organize and reorganize, in response to early stimulation.
2.2 Significance of ECE:
· Learning begins at birth. 
· ECCE: A right in itself. Access to preschool education is a right for children and development of the 
nation, because children are the nation’s future. 
· Smooth transition to primary school. 
· Manipulation of objects. 
· Emotional support. 
· Support to parents
· Developmental perspectives. Children’s motor, physical, social, cognitive and emotional functioning 
differs from that of older children and adults. It, therefore, needs a special environment
· Brain development. 
· Lasting imprints. The care and nurture given to the children in the early years have a vital and lasting 
impact on their growth to adulthood and it influences the development of their ability to adjust and 
capacity to regulate their emotions. 
· Foundation for personality development. 
· Early education: It is difficult to learn in the first grade without early preparation. Readiness activities 
like drawing, clay modeling, cutting, pasting, learning rhymes, listing stories and outdoor activities 
enable children to read, write and do arithmetic in an admirable way, in later years. 
· Group activity- Apart from all the above mentioned reasons, children love to play with other 
children. 
· In a preschool a child gets the opportunity of playing with other children, and thus learns to share, 
wait for his/her turn, co-operate with others and acquire other social skills
· Behavioral disorders: Due to the occurrence of stressful experiences, children often develop 
behavioral disorders. These may be in the form of aggressive behaviour, regression, shyness, anxiety 
or hyper activity. 
· When parents and teachers try to understand the child’s problems and show a reassuring attitude to 
help the child overcome anxiety and fear, the child is able to get over the behavioral disorders
Development in Early Years 
Motor Development:
· In the area of motor development, children master the skills of walking, running and balancing, etc., 
by the age of three. 
· And by the age of four, five and six, they are genuinely accomplished to face increased physical 
challenges, eye-hand co-ordination, fine-muscular co-ordination and large muscular co-ordination 
are at an accelerated speed. 
Emotional Development:
· Preschool age is the crucial stage of emotional development too. A child learns to control and 
express his/ her emotions in an acceptable manner. 
Social Development:
· On the social development front, the child starts enjoying the company of other children by the age 
of three and in the process he/ she learns to adapt to the environment in which he/ she has to live 
and function. 
· Knowledge, attitude and proper social conduct imbibed by children at this age tend to alter their 
outlook and behaviour in future and prepare the child to become a worthy and useful citizen of the 
country. 
Intellectual Development:
· Intellectual development of an individual through various phases of life shows that about 50 percent 
of the abilities and aptitudes are attained by the age of four. 
· The following 30 percent are acquired between five and eight years and remaining 20 percent 
between the age of eight and seventeen years. 
2.3 Development Involves Changes
Development follows growth. Growth signifies quantitative changes and development signifies 
qualitative changes. Development generally is forward rather than backward. Development occurs due 
to opportunities or experiences one receives in the environment Development occurs in an orderly 
fashion. The goal of development is the achievement of genetic potential. The individual should be 
skillfully used growth which has taken place which is possible only if enough opportunities are available.
i) Early Development is More Critical than later development 
Development that takes place due to environmental interaction or opportunities provided, 
forms the base for future growth and development. These early foundations are greatly 
influenced by learning and experiences. Since early experiences play a dominant role in 
development, children can be directed into channels that will lead to good adjustment. Early 
foundations quickly form into habitual patterns that has a lifelong influence on children. Patterns 
of attitudes and behaviour formed early persist and are resistible to change. Eagerness to learn 
help children adjust to changes made early than later.
ii) Development is the product of maturation and Learning
Maturation is the unfolding of characteristics potentially present in the individual due to 
heredity endowment .For these potentials to be developed well training is essential. However, if 
potentials are not inherited no amount of training can develop the individual in any area. 
Maturation sets the limits to learning. Training helps an individual develop his or her potential to 
the fullest.
iii) The development pattern is predictable 
Development takes place in a sequence. Genetic studies have revealed that pattern of 
development is predictable in specific areas. The importance of being able to predict the pattern 
is it helps to plan future stages of development at least in some areas. The pattern of 
development can be delayed or accelerated by environmental conditions.
iv) Individual Differences in Development 
Though the pattern of development is similar to all children, all children follow the pattern in 
their own pace or rate. The cause of differences is that no two individuals have identical 
environment. The individual differences are caused by internal and external conditions .This 
knowledge helps us to accept differences in children though they may belong to the same age 
group. It helps to set a wider range of expectations and give room to individual differences in 
classroom learning.
v) Periods in the development pattern 
Though development is continuous, there is evidence that at different ages certain traits stand 
out. This marks the major developmental periods; the prenatal, birth, infancy, babyhood etc. 
Within these periods there are peaks, signifying acceleration of growth, plateau, and lean 
periods behaviour that are normal during certain periods and behaviour that arc carried over to 
other periods called problem behaviour.
vi) Social expectations for every development pattern
As every cultural group has it's own methods of child rearing, it has its own developmental time 
table. It is formed on the heredity patterns and social norms set by the group. There are 
developmental tasks set for each period. This forms the guideline for setting social and 
psychological environment to enhance growth. Environmental opportunities, intelligence and 
physical makeup of the individual would determine the time and level of mastery of the tasks.
2.4 Factors Affecting Development 
There are several factors which directly or indirectly influence the growth and development of 
an organism. These are as follows: 
• Heredity
• Environment
• Sex
• Nutrition
• Races
• Exercise
• Learning
• Reinforcement
Heredity: 
• Heredity is a biological process through which the transmission of physical and social characteristics takes 
place from parents to off-springs. It greatly influences the different aspects of growth and development i.e. 
height, weight and structure of the body, colour of hair and eye, intelligence, aptitudes and instincts. 
• However environment equally influences the above aspects in many cases. Biologically speaking heredity is 
the sum total of traits potentially present in the fertilized ovum (Combination of sperm cell & egg cell), by 
which off-springs are resemblance to their parents and fore parents.
Environment:
• Environment plays an important role in human life. Psychologically a person's environment consists of the 
sum total of the stimulations (physical & Psychological) which he receives from his conception. There are 
different types of environment such as physical, environment, social environment & psychological 
environment. 
• Physical environment consists of all outer physical surroundings both in-animate and animate which have 
to be manipulated in order to provide food, clothing and shelter. Geographical conditions i.e. weather and 
climates are physical environment, which has considerable impact on individual child. 
• The society-individuals and institutions, social laws, customs by which human behavior is regulated, 
constitute a social environment. 
• Psychological environment is rooted in individual's reaction with an object. One's love, affection and fellow 
feeling attitude will strengthen human bond with one another. • So Growth and Development are regulated 
by the environment of an individual where he lives. 
Sex :
• Sex acts as an important factor of growth and development. There is difference in growth and 
development of boys and girls. The boys are in general taller than the girls but Girls show rapid physical 
growth in adolescence and excel boys. In general, the body constitution and structural growth of girls are 
different from boys. 
Nutrition :
• Growth and Development of the child mainly depend on his food habits & nutrition. The malnutrition has 
adverse effect on the structural and functional development of the child.
Races :
• The racial factor has a great influence on height, weight, colour, features and body constitution. 
Exercise :
• This does not mean the physical exercise as a discipline. The functional activities of the child come in the 
fold of exercise of the body. We do not mean any law of growth through use or atrophy (The reverse of 
growth) through disuse. 
• The growth of muscles from the normal functioning of the child is a matter of common knowledge. It is a 
fact that repeated play and rest build the strength of the muscle. The increase in muscular strength is mainly 
due to better circulation and oxygen supply. The brain muscles develop by its own activity-play and other 
activities provide for these growth and development of various muscles. Deliberately the child does not play 
or engages himself in various other functions with the knowledge that they will help him in growing. This 
style of functioning of the child is but natural.
Learning 
• Learning is the most important and fundamental topic in the whole science of psychology. Development 
consists of maturation and learning. Without any learning the human organism is a structure of various 
limbs, all other internal organs with muscles and bones. However, the term maturation is considered the 
development of psychology and not human body.
• Learning includes much more than school learning. Learning goes to help the human child in his physical, 
mental, emotional, intellectual, social and attitudinal developments. All knowledge and skill, all habits, good 
and bad, all acquaintances with people and things, all attitudes built up in your dealing with people and 
things have been learned. 
Reinforcement:
Reinforcement is a factor in learning. Exercise or activity is necessary for learning. It may be a motor activity, 
as in playing on a musical instrument. Alternatively, it may be a sensory activity as in listening to a piece of 
music. Whatsoever, there must be activity in some from or other. "We learn by doing". It is an old 
psychological proverb. Now it is that out activity should be repeated until we get the desired results so the 
proverb should be, "We learn by doing getting results."
Bibliography:
· (Doherty, 1997)
· (http://www.sccommissioners.org/pdfs/primers /icdsguidelines.pdf).
· (MWCD, 2010)
· National Early Childhood Care and Education (ECCE) Curriculum Framework, pages 4-8, by Ministry 
of Women and Child Devel
