Chapter 1 Understanding the context of the child – gender, caste, social class, caste, religion, family structure and location cd 1.1 Introduction 1.2 Context of the Child 2.2 Development Involves changes 1.3 Status of Policy Implementation  ba 1.1 Introduction - The first six years of life are critical years of human life since the rate of development in these years is most rapid. Global brain research also informs us about the significance of early years for brain development. Early childhood care and education (ECCE) makes a positive contribution to children’s long term development and learning by facilitating an enabling and stimulating environment in these foundation stages of lifelong learning. Parents as care givers are critical in providing a stimulating learning environment to the child as in the first two and a half to three years the child may not be in a formal setting. Thus we acknowledge the significance of involvement of parents, family and community.  1.2 Context of the child (Growing up in India) – India has a tradition of valuing the early years of a child’s life, and a rich heritage of cultural practices for stimulating development and inculcating “sanskaras” or basic values and social skills in children. In the past this was delivered primarily within joint families, through traditional child caring practices which were commonly shared and passed on from one generation to another. However there have been changes in the family as well as social context in the last few decades. Families and communities represent vast geographic, social, cultural, linguistic and economic diversity within the country. Children also differ in their physical, emotional, social and cognitive capacities. Urban and rural communities offer different types of opportunities and face distinct challenges in providing good quality early care and learning experiences to children. Socio-economic status as well as social and cultural diversity characterize the nature of family life and the context of growing up in India. Each child requires a safe and nurturing environment to develop optimally. Children with special needs and their families need assistance and information regarding prognosis and early intervention in order to support optimal development of children. Other families can also face stresses that can compromise their ability to support their children’s early learning and need support services to assist families in their critical role as primary caregivers. Discrimination and inequities based on gender, social identity, disability and other exclusionary factors is prevalent in the society that adds to the above problem. The issues need to be addressed proactively to ensure universal access to integrated services towards fulfillment of right to free, universal pre-primary education. Regardless of income, social status, geographical location and other potential barriers, all children deserve and have a right to inclusive and equitable opportunities to build on their unique strengths. In recent times many children are receiving early education and care outside the home in child care centers, pre-school programs and other community based early learning settings. Whether children receive early education and care in the home or the community, it is important that their early learning experiences draw on the unique strength of their relationships with their families. The diversity in social contexts and family structures needs to be appropriately addressed in order to bring balanced parenting, including inputs from fathers, mothers and other caregivers in the family through enabling provisions in programmes. Thus, Early Childhood Care and Education encompass the inseparable elements of care, health, nutrition, play and early learning within a protective and enabling environment. It is imperative to accord priority attention to ECCE and invest in it since it is the most cost effective way to break the intergenerational cycle of multiple disadvantages and remove inequity. Investing in ECCE will undoubtedly lead to long term social and economic benefits. 1.3 Status of Policy implementation in India · Preparation of early childhood practitioners and professionals has also not been commensurate with burgeoning socio-economic and political complexities. While institutional training and preparation has evolved very slowly, demands for the care and education of young children have progressed far too rapidly, particularly with the disruption of the joint family system and with more and more women joining the work force.  · The Context of Early Childhood Care and Education in India With a population of over a billion people, India has more than 350 million children between 0 and 18 years of age. Of these, about 157.86 million are between 0 and 6 years of age (http://www.sccommissioners.org/pdfs/primers /icdsguidelines.pdf). This number is more than three times the population of United Kingdom and about two thirds the population of USA.  · Clearly, the responsibility of reaching out to this large number is monumental in terms of funds, planning, infrastructure, staffing and training, development of professionals, establishment of service centers, monitoring of quality, management of services, support organizations, research and continuing professional development. India has been implementing perhaps the world’s largest ECCE programme known as the Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS) since 1975.  · Begun initially in 35 Blocks, it is now slated for universalization, according to a recent Supreme Court directive. · This programme in accordance with the life cycle perspective caters to pregnant women, mothers and young children below 6 years through a basket of services including health and nutrition education, health services, supplementary food, and pre-school education.  · The programme is currently reaching out to about seventy two million children below six years of age and about fifteen million pregnant and lactating women through a national network of 1078973 operational anganwadi centers (AWCs)and mini AWCs located across the country (MWCD, 2010). The programme has also witnessed a fair share of controversies vis-à-vis its impact and outreach. Its preschool educationcomponent is considered to be the weakest link in terms of impact.  · Other than ICDS, which is in the public sector, a range of programmes have been initiated by NGOs in different parts of the country. These include either government supported or independently run Balwadi programmes or pre-schools attached to schools. While government run programmes (largely ICDS) tend to be minimalist in their approach, as these moves to scale with a single worker responsible for six services, NGOs too receive little financial, programmatic and professional support to build enduring institutions.  · In the absence of an active state, several private players have established nursery and preparatory schools where beliefs and practices are largely defined by unregulated market related priorities.  · The urban landscape in Indian cities and towns (now increasingly visible in rural areas as well), is thus filled with a huge number of unrecognized, unregulated and unsupported preschools, popularly referred to as ‘preparatory and nursery schools’.  · In high and low income neighborhoods, many nursery schools also run day care centers or crèches to address the needs of a growing workforce of women outside the home environments. A sizeable number of primary and senior secondary schools also run nursery sections with minimal understanding of the needs of young children.  · These schools are often staffed with untrained or poorly trained teachers where curricular practices are usually not defined by developmental perspectives, and young children tend to be recipients of a push-down curricularapproach. In metropolitan cities, early stimulation centers for young parents, infants and toddlers are introducing new notions of early childhood care and education to the urban elite; there are indications of future trends where children as young as one and two years will be brought for institutional care and early learning.  · The wide range of organized and unorganized, unregulated provisions for ECCE are inevitably creating a demand for multi-skilled professionals who can work at multiple levels. Shifts in ECCE Practices and Expectations The field of ECCE in India is replete with slow moving policy and programmatic initiatives, certainly not in pace with the rapid increase in population of young children and emerging social, economic and cultural changes.  · Each significant change impacts the field in some way, leaving in its trail a new set of conflicts, constraints and issues to resolve. Shifts Because of Policy: The National Policy on Education in 1986 established for the first time the significance of ECCE as a first step in the education ladder and as a field that requires extensive coverage, increased funding and the development of a perspective that believes in the holistic development of young children.  · It clearly directed that learning should be joyful and “there shall be no formal teaching of the 3R’s at this stage.” Although progress since that year has been slow in terms of programmes and outreach, each subsequent Five Year Plan has articulated the need to prioritize education and development of children below 6 years of age. Bibliography: · (Doherty, 1997) · (http://www.sccommissioners.org/pdfs/primers /icdsguidelines.pdf). · (MWCD, 2010) 
